Raspberry Pi tutorial (#144)
nix-dot-dev/nix.dev: source/tutorials/installing-nixos-on-a-raspberry-pi.rst

Installing NixOS on a Raspberry Pi
==================================

This tutorial assumes `Raspberry P 4 Model B with 4GB RAM <https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/>`_.

Before starting this tutorial, make sure you have 
`all necessary hardware <https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/raspberry-pi-setting-up/1>`_:

- HDMI cable/adapter.
- 8GB+ SD card.
- SD card reader in case your machine doesn't have an SD slot.
- Power cable for your RPi.
- USB keyboard.

.. note:: 

  RPi 2 won't work since it doesn't support 64bit OS, while RPi 3 should work with more fiddling.

Booting NixOS live image
------------------------

> .. note:: Booting from a USB for vast majority of boards won't work without updating firmware. This tutorial boots from an SD card to avoid such hiccups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Booting from USB may require an EEPROM firmware upgrade. This tutorial boots from an SD card to avoid such hiccups.
```

> Prepare the Aarch64 image on your laptop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prepare the AArch64 image on your laptop:
```

.. code:: shell-session

  $ nix-shell -p wget zstd
  $ wget https://hydra.nixos.org/build/142828023/download/1/nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ unzstd -d nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst

>   $ dmesg -w

Author: I'd like to pin it so that I'm 100% that it works for the user. I'll set up tasks to update these for every release.

Maybe at the end of tutorial we should do `nixos-rebuild switch --upgrade`

Your terminal should be printing kernel messages as they come in.

Plug in your SD card and your terminal should print what device it got assigned, for example ``/dev/sdX``.

Press ``ctrl-c`` to stop ``dmesg -w``.

Copy NixOS to your SD card by replacing ``sdX`` with the name of your device:

.. code:: shell-session 

  sudo dd if=nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img of=/dev/sdX bs=4096 conv=fsync status=progress

Once that command exits, move the SD card into your RPi and power it on.

You should be greeted with a fresh shell!

> Run ``sudo su`` for the rest of the tutorial.

Author: I prefer getting root shell as it's really needed for most of the commands.

Getting internet connection
---------------------------

At this point we'll need internet connection. If you can use an ethernet cable, plug it in.

In case you're connecting to a wifi run ``iwconfig`` to see what is the name of your wireless
network interface. In case it's ``wlan0`` replace ``SSID`` and ``passphrase`` with your data and run:

.. code:: shell-session 

  $ wpa_supplicant -B -i wlan0 -c <(wpa_passphrase 'SSID' 'passphrase') &

Once you see in your terminal that connection is established, run ``host google.com`` to 
check that DNS resolves correctly.

In case you've made a typo, run ``pkill wpa_supplicant`` and start over.

Updating firmware
-----------------

> To increase chances for hardware to work, we'll start by updating RPi firmware:

Author: Agreed!

.. code:: shell-session

  $ nix-shell -p raspberrypi-eeprom
  $ FIRMWARE_RELEASE_STATUS=stable rpi-eeprom-update -d -a

  
Installing NixOS 
----------------

For initial installation we'll install `XFCE <https://www.xfce.org/>`_ desktop environment
with user ``guest`` and SSH daemon.

.. code:: nix 

  { config, pkgs, lib, ... }:

  let
    user = "guest";
    password = "guest";
    SSID = "mywifi";
    SSIDpassword = "mypassword";
    interface = "wlan0";
    hostname = "myhostname";
  in {

>     imports = ["${fetchTarball "https://github.com/domenkozar/nixos-hardware/archive/rpi4.tar.gz" }/raspberry-pi/4"];

Author: This is just a placeholder until it's merged into nixos-hardware, then I'll pin it.

    fileSystems = {
      "/" = {
        device = "/dev/disk/by-label/NIXOS_SD";
        fsType = "ext4";
        options = [ "noatime" ];
      };
    };

    networking = {
      hostName = hostname;
      wireless = {
        enable = true;
        networks."${SSID}".psk = SSIDpassword;
        interfaces = [ interface ];
      };
    };

    environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [ vim ];

    services.openssh.enable = true;

    users = {
      mutableUsers = false;
      users.guest = {
        isNormalUser = true;
        password = password;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
      };
    };

    # video
    services.xserver = {
      enable = true;
      displayManager.lightdm.enable = true;
      desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;

>       videoDrivers = [ "fbdev" ];

Reviewer: "modesetting" should work, and better, I believe.

(I'll have to boot one of my devices to validate some parts of the config.)

Author: I've tried it and it fails to start, it's probably because that's supposed to use GPU, but that doesn't work yet - I have yet to open an issue for this.

Reviewer: https://github.com/NixOS/nixos-hardware/pull/261

We can drop this line entirely, and instead add

```nix
{
  hardware.raspberry-pi."4".fkms-3d.enable = true;
}
```

    };

    # audio
    hardware.pulseaudio.enable = true;
  }

To save time on typing the whole configuration, download it:

.. code:: shell-session

  $ curl -L https://tinyurl.com/nixos-rpi-tutorial-preview > /etc/nixos/configuration.nix 

At the top of the file there are a few variables that you'd want to configure,
most important being your wifi connection details, this time specified in declarative way.

Once you're ready to install NixOS:

.. code:: shell-session

  $ nixos-install --root /

>   $ shutdown -r now

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  $ reboot
```

?

In case your system doesn't boot, select the oldest configuration in the bootloader menu to get back to live image and start over.

Making changes 
--------------

In case it does boot, congratulations!

To make further changes to configuration, `search through NixOS options <https://search.nixos.org/options>`_,
edit ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and update your system:

.. code:: shell-session 

>   $ sudo su

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ sudo -i
```

Same concerns about this not agreeing with upstream recommendations. But now this concerns me a bit more since this is on the end-user's final system.

  $ unzstd -d nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ dmesg --follow

Your terminal should be printing kernel messages as they come in.

Plug in your SD card and your terminal should print what device it got assigned, for example ``/dev/sdX``.

Press ``ctrl-c`` to stop ``dmesg -w``.

Copy NixOS to your SD card by replacing ``sdX`` with the name of your device:

.. code:: shell-session 

  sudo dd if=nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img of=/dev/sdX bs=4096 conv=fsync status=progress

Once that command exits, **move the SD card into your Raspberry Pi and power it on**.

You should be greeted with a fresh shell!

Getting internet connection
---------------------------

Run ``sudo -i`` to get a root shell for the rest of the tutorial.

At this point we'll need internet connection. If you can use an ethernet cable, plug it in.

In case you're connecting to a wifi run ``iwconfig`` to see what is the name of your wireless
network interface. In case it's ``wlan0`` replace ``SSID`` and ``passphrase`` with your data and run:

.. code:: shell-session 

  # wpa_supplicant -B -i wlan0 -c <(wpa_passphrase 'SSID' 'passphrase') &

> Once you see in your terminal that connection is established, run ``host google.com`` to 

Reviewer: `google.com` is not a connection testing service!

If we are to namedrop a domain name, it could also be `nixos.org`

check that DNS resolves correctly.

In case you've made a typo, run ``pkill wpa_supplicant`` and start over.

Updating firmware
-----------------

To benefit from updates and bug fixes from the vendor, we'll start by updating Raspberry Pi firmware:

.. code:: shell-session

  # nix-shell -p raspberrypi-eeprom

>   # FIRMWARE_RELEASE_STATUS=stable rpi-eeprom-update -d -a

Reviewer: As this is, it won't work because it drops files into `/boot`, expecting that `/boot` is the board-specific "FIRMWARE" partition.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/132835/118033811-3c3aed00-b337-11eb-99b5-b6105e1bcf69.png)

Sorry for the blurriness, the capture card doesn't deal well with thin lines. Here's the commands to make it work right:

```
 # mount /dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE /mnt
 # BOOTFS=/mnt FIRMWARE_RELEASE_STATUS=stable rpi-eeprom-update -d -a
```

Updating the EEPROM then requires a reboot.

  
Installing NixOS 
----------------

For initial installation we'll install `XFCE <https://www.xfce.org/>`_ desktop environment
with user ``guest`` and SSH daemon.

.. code:: nix 

  { config, pkgs, lib, ... }:

  let
    user = "guest";
    password = "guest";
    SSID = "mywifi";
    SSIDpassword = "mypassword";
    interface = "wlan0";
    hostname = "myhostname";
  in {
    imports = ["${fetchTarball "https://github.com/domenkozar/nixos-hardware/archive/rpi4.tar.gz" }/raspberry-pi/4"];

    fileSystems = {
      "/" = {
        device = "/dev/disk/by-label/NIXOS_SD";
        fsType = "ext4";
        options = [ "noatime" ];
      };
    };

    networking = {
      hostName = hostname;
      wireless = {
        enable = true;
        networks."${SSID}".psk = SSIDpassword;
        interfaces = [ interface ];
      };
    };

    environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [ vim ];

    services.openssh.enable = true;

    users = {
      mutableUsers = false;

>       users.guest = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      users.${user} = {
```

        isNormalUser = true;
        password = password;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
      };
    };

    # video
    services.xserver = {
      enable = true;
      displayManager.lightdm.enable = true;
      desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;
      videoDrivers = [ "fbdev" ];
    };

    # audio
    hardware.pulseaudio.enable = true;
  }

To save time on typing the whole configuration, download it:

.. code:: shell-session

  # curl -L https://tinyurl.com/nixos-rpi-tutorial-preview > /etc/nixos/configuration.nix 

At the top of `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` there are a few variables that you want to configure,
most important being your wifi connection details, this time specified in declarative way.

Once you're ready to install NixOS:

.. code:: shell-session

>   # nixos-install --root /

Reviewer: Just a note, nothing to change. A `nixos-rebuild` would work just as well... Except that `nixos-install` prompts you to set a root password, and could be doing other "housekeeping" stuff.

Author: Let's keep it as-is for now, although I'm tempted by the simplification. Maybe it's still better to teach how NixOS is installed uniformly.

  # reboot

In case your system doesn't boot, select the oldest configuration in the bootloader menu to get back to live image and start over.

Making changes 
--------------

It booted, congratulations!

To make further changes to the configuration, `search through NixOS options <https://search.nixos.org/options>`_,
edit ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and update your system:

.. code:: shell-session 

  $ sudo -i
  # nixos-rebuild switch

Going forward
-------------

- Once you have successfully running OS, try upgrading it with `nixos-rebuild switch --upgrade` and boot the old configuration if something broke.
  

> - To tweak bootloader options affecting hardware, look at `setting /boot/config.txt options <https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/config-txt/>`_.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how it would be integrated to your tutorial, but it might be important to specify that `config.txt` will not be found under `/boot/` like it would in most Raspberry Pi-first distros.

That to edit the `config.txt` options, `/dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE` needs to be (temporarily) mounted to `/mnt` (or elsewhere).
